Purpose
--------------

URLUtils is a collection of category methods designed to simplify the process of URL construction and manipulation in Cocoa. It extends NSString and NSURL with some additional utility methods that were left out of the standard API.


Supported OS & SDK Versions
-----------------------------

* Supported build target - iOS 5.0 / Mac OS 10.7 (Xcode 4.2, Apple LLVM compiler 3.0)
* Earliest supported deployment target - iOS 4.3 / Mac OS 10.6
* Earliest compatible deployment target - iOS 3.0 / Mac OS 10.6

NOTE: 'Supported' means that the library has been tested with this version. 'Compatible' means that the library should work on this iOS version (i.e. it doesn't rely on any unavailable SDK features) but is no longer being tested for compatibility and may require tweaking or bug fixes to run correctly.


ARC Compatibility
------------------

URLUtils makes use of the ARC Helper library to automatically work with both ARC and non-ARC projects through conditional compilation. There is no need to exclude URLUtils files from the ARC validation process, or to convert URLUtils using the ARC conversion tool.


Thread Safety
--------------

All the URLUtils methods should be safe to use concurrently on multiple threads.


Installation
--------------

To use the URLUtils categories in an app, just drag the URLUtils category files (demo files and assets are not needed) into your project and import the header files into any class where you wish to make use of the URLUtils functionality.


NSString Extensions
----------------------

URLUtils extends NSString with the following methods:

	- (NSString *)URLEncodedString;
	
This is a method to URL-encode a string so that it may be safely used within a URL path or query parameter. This method is different from the standard `stringByAddingPercentEscapesUsingEncoding:` method because that only ensures that the string does not contain characters that are invalid for use in a string, but it doesn't encode characters that are valid to use in a url (e.g. "?", "&") but which cannot be used inside a query string parameter or path component without affecting the URL structure.

	- (NSString *)URLDecodedString:(BOOL)decodePlusAsSpace;
	
This reverses the effects of `URLEncodedString` or `URLSafeString` by replacing all percent escape sequences with their original characters. Internally this method uses to `stringByReplacingPercentEscapesUsingEncoding:` with NSUTF8StringEncoding. The parameter `decodePlusAsSpace` will cause "+" characters to be converted to spaces, which is useful if the parameters were generated by a web form.
	
    - (NSString *)stringByAppendingURLPathComponent:(NSString *)str;
    
NSString has a useful method `stringByAppendingPathComponent:` which can be used to add path components to the end of the string whilst correctly adding a dividing `/` and avoiding double `/` if one or both path components already include it. Unfortunately the `stringByAppendingPathComponent:` is not URL-aware, and incorrectly strips the double `//` from URLs when a path is appended. `stringByAppendingURLPathComponent` is much smarter, and not only avoids stripping the `//` from the URL schema, but will also correctly insert the path component *before* the URL query or fragment string.
    
    - (NSString *)stringByDeletingLastURLPathComponent;
    
This is a URL-aware version of the `stringByDeletingLastPathComponent` method. It will remove the last component of the path without disrupting the query or fragment strings (if present).
    
    - (NSString *)lastURLPathComponent;
    
This is a URL-aware version of the `lastPathComponent` method. It will return the last component of the path without including the query or fragment strings (if present).
	
	+ (NSString *)URLQueryWithParameters:(NSDictionary *)parameters;
	
This method generates a URL query string from a dictionary of keys and values. The values in the dictionary can either be individual values such as strings or numbers, or arrays of values, in which case the last value in the array will be used by default. All key and values in the dictionary will be automatically URL-encoded. See below for more options around how parameter arrays are handled.
	
	+ (NSString *)URLQueryWithParameters:(NSDictionary *)parameters options:(URLQueryOptions)options;
	
This method generates a URL query string from a dictionary of keys and values, but provides an additional `options` argument to control how parameter arrays are handled. All keys and values in the dictionary will be automatically URL encoded. See `URLQueryOptions` below for discussion of the options.
	
	- (NSString *)URLQuery;
	
This method attempts to find and return a URL query string within the string. It is similar to the `query` method of NSURL, but works better with partial URLs/URIs or URLs with non-standard structures, e.g. bespoke schemas.
	
	- (NSString *)stringByDeletingURLQuery;
	
This method finds and removes the URL query from the string. It is URL fragment/hash aware and will leave the URL fragment untouched if present.
	
	- (NSString *)stringByAppendingURLQuery:(NSString *)query;
	
This method will append a URL query to the string. It is URL fragment/hash aware and will insert the query string before the # if present. It will also correctly join the string to an existing query string if present. If there is already a query string present, the two strings will be concatenated with no regard for duplicate parameters, however a joining `&` will be inserted if needed. For more options around merging query strings, see below:
	
	- (NSString *)stringByMergingURLQuery:(NSString *)query;
	
This method will append a URL query to the string, merging any duplicate values. Duplicate query parameter keys will be replaced by the last value encountered for that key. For more merging options, see below:
	
	- (NSString *)stringByMergingURLQuery:(NSString *)query options:(URLQueryOptions)options;
	
This method will append a URL query to the string, merging any duplicate values. By default, duplicate query parameters will be replaced by the last value encountered for that key, but you can override that behaviour using the `options` argument. See `URLQueryOptions` below for discussion of the options.
	
	- (NSDictionary *)URLQueryParameters;
	
This method attempts to locate a query string within the string and then splits it into a dictionary of key/value pairs. Each key and value will be URL decoded. If duplicate parameter keys are encountered, the last value encountered for that key is used. To override this behaviour, use `URLQueryParametersWithOptions:` instead.

	- (NSDictionary *)URLQueryParametersWithOptions:(URLQueryOptions)options;
	
This method attempts to locate a query string within the string and then splits it into a dictionary of key/value pairs. Each key and value will be URL decoded. The `options` argument controls how duplicate parameters should be handled. See `URLQueryOptions` below for discussion of the options.
		
	- (NSString *)URLFragment;
	
This method returns the URL fragment identifier or hash part of the string. It is similar to the `fragment` method of NSURL, but works better with partial URLs/URIs or URLs with non-standard structures, e.g. bespoke schemas.
	
	- (NSString *)stringByDeletingURLFragment;
	
This method finds and removes the URL fragment identifier from the string (if present).
	
	- (NSString *)stringByAppendingURLFragment:(NSString *)fragment;
		
This method will append a URL fragment identifier to the string. It will also correctly concatenate the string to an existing fragment identifier if present. No attempt is made to analyse the structure of the fragment, or handle path concatenation correctly within the fragment string. If you need to do that, generate the fragment separately and then set it in one go.

	- (NSURL *)URLValue;
	
This method converts the string to a URL. It is similar to using `[NSURL URLWithString:]`, but with a couple of benefits: 1) It doesn't throw an exception if the string is nil, and 2) It automatically detects if the string is a file path and uses `[NSURL fileURLWithString:]` instead of `[NSURL URLWithString:]`, thereby eliminating a common source of bugs.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLValueRelativeToURL:(NSURL *)baseURL;
	
This method converts the string to a URL. It is similar to using `[NSURL URLWithString:relativeToURL]`, but won't throw an exception if the string is nil.


NSURL Extensions
----------------------

URLUtils extends NSURL with the following methods:

	+ (NSURL *)URLWithComponents:(NSDictionary *)components;
	
This builds a URL from the supplied dictionary of components. The dictionary may contain any or all of the following: scheme, host, port, user, password, path, parameterString, query, fragment (there are a set of constants defined for all of these values). All values are optional and the method will attempt to build as much of the URL as possible given the values supplied.
	
	- (NSDictionary *)components;
	
Returns a dictionary of URL components containing any or all of the following: scheme, host, port, user, password, path, parameterString, query, fragment.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithScheme:(NSString *)scheme;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL scheme with the supplied value.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithHost:(NSString *)host;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL host with the supplied value.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithPort:(NSString *)port;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL port with the supplied value.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithUser:(NSString *)user;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL user with the supplied value.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithPassword:(NSString *)password;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL password with the supplied value.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithPath:(NSString *)path;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL path with the supplied value.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithParameterString:(NSString *)parameterString;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL parameterString with the supplied value.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithQuery:(NSString *)query;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL query with the supplied value.
	
	- (NSURL *)URLWithFragment:(NSString *)fragment;
	
Sets or replaces the current URL fragment with the supplied value.
	

URLQueryOptions
---------------------

The query string manipulation methods offer some options for how query strings should be generated or interpreted. The options can be combined using the | (pipe) or + (plus) operators. Some of these options are mutually exclusive however, and should not be combined.

	URLQueryOptionDefault
	
The default option if no alternative is specified. When generating query strings from dictionaries using `URLQueryWithParameters:`, this maps to `URLQueryOptionUseArrays` meaning that any arrays of values will be expanded into multiple parameters.

When parsing query strings into parameter dictionaries using `URLQueryParameters` this maps to `URLQueryOptionKeepLastValue` meaning that if duplicate parameter keys are encountered, the value of the last duplicate will be used.
	
	URLQueryOptionKeepLastValue
	
This is the default option when parsing query strings into parameter dictionaries using `URLQueryParameters`. When this option is used and duplicate parameter keys are encountered, the value of the last duplicate will be used.

If this option is used when generating a query string from a dictionary using `URLQueryWithParameters:options:` and an array of values is provided for a given parameter, only the last value will be used to construct the query string.
	
	URLQueryOptionKeepFirstValue
	
If this option is used when parsing query strings into parameter dictionaries using `URLQueryParametersWithOptions:` and duplicate parameter keys are encountered, the first encountered value with a given key will be used.

If this option is used when generating a query string from a dictionary using `URLQueryWithParameters:options:` and an array of values is provided for a given parameter, only the first value will be used to construct the query string.
	
	URLQueryOptionUseArrays
	
If this option is used when parsing query strings into parameter dictionaries using `URLQueryParametersWithOptions:` and duplicate parameter keys are encountered, or the key has a "[]" array suffix, the values will be gathered into an array. The resultant parameter array will therefore contain a mix of array and string values, and you will need to add code to check the type of each dictionary entry when processing.

If this option is used when generating a query string from a dictionary using `URLQueryWithParameters:options:` and an array of values is provided for a given parameter, duplicate parameters will be added to the query string with that key.
	
	URLQueryOptionAlwaysUseArrays
	
If this option is used when parsing query strings into parameter dictionaries using `URLQueryParametersWithOptions:`, each dictionary entry will be created as an array, even if there is only one parameter with a given key (in which case the array will contain one item). The advantage of this is that you can guarantee that every dictionary entry will be an array, avoiding the need to add code to check the type of each dictionary entry when processing.

When generating a query string from a dictionary using `URLQueryWithParameters:options:`, this option is equivalent to `URLQueryOptionUseArrays` unless `URLQueryOptionUseArraySyntax` is also enabled. If `URLQueryOptionUseArraySyntax` is enabled, using `URLQueryOptionUseArrays` means that every key in the resultant query string will be suffixed with "[]", even if there is only one value associated with it. This may then impact how those parameters are interpreted later (i.e. as single-item arrays rather than strings). See `URLQueryOptionUseArraySyntax` for more discussion.
	
	URLQueryOptionUseArraySyntax

Unlike the other options, which are mutually exclusive, `URLQueryOptionUseArraySyntax` can be combined with `URLQueryOptionUseArrays` or `URLQueryOptionAlwaysUseArrays` to affect output. When generating a query string from a dictionary using `URLQueryWithParameters:options:`, setting this option means that any key with multiple value (or any key *period* if `URLQueryOptionAlwaysUseArrays` is used) will be suffixed with the "[]" syntax to indicate that it is part of a parameter array.

Use of the "[]" key suffix is not an official part of the RFC 1808 URL specification, but it is an ad-hoc standard used by a number of popular web server platforms including PHP, and so it can be useful to be able to interpret and/or generate query strings in this format. By default, this option is disabled.

`URLQueryOptionUseArraySyntax` has no effect when parsing query strings using the `URLQueryParameters:` method.